started at the beginning.
This is Noah Gordon.
I'm talking about my wife's experience with publishing as my wife.
I think it was 1963, a long time ago.
I had an idea for my first novel that I really wanted to write.
You were married in 1963?
Oh, I was married in...
I was married in 51.
I'm an old guy.
I'm 69 years old.
Wow.
And so happy to be... 45 years this year.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
And so happy to be not only married to Lorraine Gordon, but writing still, you know, and more important, wanting to write, because I remember...
One particular friend, he better remain nameless, he's a well-known magazine writer, or was, and he told me at one point, no, in your late 40s, you're reaching towards 50, you lose that creative energy, you know, and the desire, and it's pretty much all over.
I haven't lost that.
I couldn't disagree more.
I get up every morning, if I wake up at 2 o'clock,
I lie there and I'm probably thinking about a character that's been giving me some problems and solving it in bed, you know.
And I get up in the morning and I'm happy to be able to sit down and write, you know.
So I feel very lucky.
I really do.
And I hope, well, that little speech I'm going to give you indicates that
When I finished this last book, it's just coming out in America.
And that's because of here.
Yeah.
Matters of Choice.
I had a couple of ideas, but they weren't anything that, you know, that made me burn to write them.
And so I kicked them around and Lorraine said, you know, Noah, all of our friends are retiring or retired.
And why don't, you know,
Why don't you think about it?
I had a really interesting time as a reporter and as a writer, but I have a lot of interest.
I love to garden.
I like to fish and do other things.
I said, maybe it's time.
I was very seriously thinking about it.
My publisher in Spain, which is Ediciones Bay, is the name of it.
Is that spelled out in some of the stuff you're going to give me?
Yeah.
I don't have to wrestle with it.
No, no.
It's E-D-I-C-I-O-N-E-S, capital B. Ediciones Bay.
It's like Editions B. I don't know why they invented that.
They...
rushed this book into print.
Over there it's called La Doctora Cole.
Actually, it appears in Europe before the United States.
We really must expand this.
Yes, we will.
This is a phenomenon with your books in general.
They rushed it out, did a beautiful job, I must say, with a nice-looking book, well-produced book, and they put it out in a matter of weeks, because... Did you read Spanish?
I read it, I took it to high school.
So you had no way knowing whether or not they hit a good shot?
No, no, no, I can't read any of the languages.
I have a wall at home.
I'll give you a release they put out telling the countries that are publishing there a lot.
I have a wall in Ashton with all of my books, lots of editions.
But here I only have a couple.
But anyway, the reason Adicione's Day wanted to publish very quickly was they wanted to make something that they called National Book Day.
One day a year in Spain.
It's on the birthday of St.
George.
It's great.
Let me tell you about it for a few minutes because they call it Geordie's Day.
Geordie's Day.
Go there, Nick.
You've got to go there.
And you ought to publish, you ought to publish everywhere in this book.
I hope so.
The next book is going to be a, we'll talk about that in another time, but go ahead.
Okay, I'm a minister, though, but I've seen a talk alone.
It was established by Columbus's son.
I've got a continuum chapter.
I want to go back to the beginning.
Let's not talk about it anymore.
Don't get me going.
Well, I'm very interested.
I really am.
We'll talk about Spain, wouldn't you?
But what they...
What they do is, I think it's centuries old tradition that on that day, men give their women a flower, usually a long red rose, and the woman gives the man a book.
But now, wait, wait, it's better, it's better because in modern days, now most of the time the men give the women a book too.
But the whole country, every city in the country,
is taken over by this holiday and they have outdoor booths and stands on all of the wide boulevards with musicians and food vendors and flower sellers and thousands and thousands and thousands of people and at every stand
An author signed his book.
It is fantastic.
It is absolutely, you've got to go there.
You know what day they have on it?
Yeah, I'll tell you.
Or what month?
It's in April.
Is it close to Shakespeare's birthday, which is on April 23rd, I wonder?
I think it may have been on Shakespeare's birthday.
Oh, it was also Cervantes' birthday.
It was Cervantes, same day.
They both died on the same day.
Oh, they both died on the same day.
April 23rd, 1616.
Well, anyway.
Pardon me for knowing that.
No, no.
It's in my book.
Good.
I haven't finished your book.
I'm really anxious to.
Anyway, so this was marvelous.
And we went, and I had one day off, and I worked my house off.
So you went for it?
Oh, we went.
They brought us over for it, yeah.
And actually, I'm fairly certain, if you call, they can tell you.
I think I was high sales for that day.
But I had one day off.
I was only supposed to go to Barcelona, but things were so wild, I mean really wild, that they asked me to stay a week and go to Madrid.
They brought us, including my son, to Madrid, and we did it for a week in Madrid.
So I had one day left, and this guy who was president of one of the companies which owned my
my publishing house.
In other words, it was a big corporation.
They called it Grupo Cepa.
And he was a very nice guy, and we had dinner with his wife and his son.
And he told me that he, back in the 13th century, that his family were Jews in Spain.
This is a Christian family I'm talking about.
driven out of the country where the Jews were expelled.
They went to France for two centuries.
He told us, for two centuries away, I'd say to you, yeah, we lived in West Massachusetts for four years, you know.
And then in the 1700s, when the Inquisition eased, he said hundreds of thousands of people flooded back into Spain, but they all had names like
De La Cruz, they had Catholic names that were now converted, you know, or some of them had been converted beforehand and had been Murano's conversos.
They may have also been wise to us.
Yeah, but at any rate, so he has not been Jewish for, you know, centuries.
But he was kind of proud of the fact that his family had come from Toledo, and I'd heard
I'm not totally a religious man, I'm not, but I'm very ethnic and my traditions go out to me.
It represents my parents who were no longer here and my uncles and aunts and grandparents.
And I've heard that there were two old synagogues in Toledo, and they haven't been synagogues since 1492, but I wanted to see them.
Yeah.
And so he arranged for a car and a driver and a guide and all this stuff.
And we went out there and honestly the book that I'm now working on leads up and
Don't quote me in PW, but bit me on the ass, you know.
It really just was all there.
All of a sudden, I saw this wonderful book that I wanted to write more than I wanted to write any of the books I've ever written, honestly.
So it was kind of karma.
And the whole thing, which is a modern story and an ancient story, and it all just was there for me in that one day.
And so I said to Lorraine, you know, Lorraine, we talk about retirement, but she said, you know, so...
I probably never was there.
My first book was published at the age of 52.
I'm as excited.
Absolutely.
And my mind is as sharp.
Oh, you could write for years.
And so could I. I can't wait to get out there.
We're lucky.
Do you really want to go out and do one of these trips?
Do you not have any of my friends?
I said, I can't wait.
hate their jobs, you know, have hated their jobs all their lives, welcome the chance to sit and leave the newspaper out there, which is probably crazy.
But anyway.
I quit my job five years ago.
The best thing I ever did was to do this.
Isn't that great?
That your wife has to say it's okay.
Then you know exactly, exactly.
In this little speech I mentioned, you know, going to all that with Bob Murray.
It's okay, but you have to be so certain that you have her emotional approval.
Absolutely.
There's no question about it.
A writer who is married really needs a writer's wife.
You bet.
Because otherwise it's too tough.
He gets pride in it.
And I said, I'm going to get a new book to you.
No question.
No question about it.
So I'm writing a book called The Secret Jew about the Inquisition and about a modern man
That's the work in progress?
That's the work in progress.
And does it have a title?
The Secret Union.
That is a title.
That's my working title at least.
But you just told me, which is very interesting.
That's the story.
Well, that's right.
Does it relate to any of these at all?
No, it's a separate... So this series is basically... Funny, I get a lot of mail, a whole lot of mail, and they're mad at me for making it a trilogy.
The characters, the same characters in the books, continued, you know.
So, who knows, maybe when I'm 98, I'd want to go back and do one of them.
Do you think you pretty much explored their history?
Well, what I did, that's still going, isn't it?
Yeah, what I did, Nick, was about 13 years ago.
It's going all the time.
Yeah, okay.
About 13 years ago, I decided to do something that was very, that I didn't,
really describe at the beginning because it's kind of pretentious and maybe a little pompous, but I decided to write in fiction a kind of simplified history of medicine.
And the reason I chose three books instead of twelve books or eight books is that it seemed to me that medicine could be divided into three kind of main segments.
One which took many centuries, from the earliest time all the way up to the middle of the 1800s, was a period when doctors led people and they cut patients and they gave them medications that often did them more harm than good and sometimes killed them.
And that's what I wrote about in The Physician.
and the first book of the series.
Which I interviewed you in.
Yeah.
Was that the book that you had me to the telegram party for?
I think so.
I think so, yeah.
That's right.
What year was that published?
You'll have to look.
That'll be in the article.
We'll have to look.
You don't even know if it's there, but I can check it out.
Okay.
Because it'll help me find the clip in my story a lot easier.
All right.
Well, I think I've got all those dates upstairs, but I don't remember.
And that was the first book.
Actually, what I did was I wrote an outline to give credit where credit is due.
I wrote an outline for that first book, and I shipped it to my agent, who was then a woman named Patricia Sharple at McIntosh and Otis.
Very good agent.
S-C-H-A-R-T-L-E.
She's still around.
Patricia Shadon, Myra.
She married Tony Myra, Anton Myra, a novelist, one of her novelists she married and retired.
He died about a week or two ago.
I just saw you over it.
He just died, yeah, which I'm sad about.
I dropped a note.
But she was my agent for some years, and she was a terrific agent.
Bob Massey married his agent.
Really?
Must be comforting, in a way.
But they love your work.
I mean, it helps.
Yeah, exactly.
So anyway, Kat sent back a note, and she said she really loved the outline that was going to be ahead of the book.
She said, Noah, did you ever think of maybe treating the author, the protagonist, as one of a series of generations of doctors, and that might make it a little more interesting.
And I thought about it for a while, and I said, I don't want to do that, because if I do that, I'm going to have to skim over a lot of characters, and I won't be able to get any depth to the character.
I'd rather do a series of books, and then I thought that I could do a history of medicine through this family of doctors, generation after generation of physicians.
The second book would come right about just before, during, and after the Civil War, when medicine obtained two things.
The American Civil War.
They got anesthesia right here at the Massachusetts General Hospital, first operation done, I think it was 1864, and also antisepsis.
So now, for the first time, they could operate on a patient.
They wouldn't kill him because of shock.
He wouldn't become infected, you know.
And it's a whole new ballgame for medicine.
And that was what I wrote about in Shaman, you know.
And then the third book,
takes place now.
This book takes place now in a time of terrible turmoil as far as our health system in America is concerned.
The system, it's not so much technique anymore.
And as far as technique is concerned, what we have now is we have technology.
We've got these wonder machines that give all kinds of
sophisticated stuff which we never could do before but we paid something for them because now the doctor has a very limited contact with the patient he uses he's a machine keeper you know he is really troubled by all kinds of choices and decisions that he has to make about his professional life
He's got to know how he feels about assisted death.
He's got to know how he feels about abortion.
Yeah, he's got to know how he feels about looking at people who don't have hospitalization insurance, medical insurance.
And what do you do?
You send them away.
A lot of doctors do.
A lot of doctors don't.
I know doctors who treat patients pretty, you know.
But I know doctors who do not do that too.
Did you get into this whole question of transplants?
No, I didn't get into transplants.
What I got into was my protagonist in this one is a woman.
And the reason for that is that in the other two books, the protagonist couldn't have been a woman because there weren't women doctors.
And now we have women doctors all over the world.
So I thought that that would really be interesting.
And she starts out in Boston at a medical center with all the machines.
And she ends up at a little town that my fellow townsmen are going to recognize immediately up in the hills of West of Massachusetts.
You know, Main Street is Main Street.
Her house is different.
You wouldn't name it in the book.
I forgot, Woodfield, I think.
but it's Asheville, Massachusetts.
The land that the house is on is absolutely mine to the last inch, including the trail we cut through the woods and the river and all that.
This is for fun then?
Yeah, I had a good time.
As a matter of fact, a woman from
from Munich came and stayed with us for three days and saw the town and saw the, you know, the trail, walked the trail and all that stuff.
And if you ever wanted to go out there for the day, we'd have a good time hiking around.
But anyway, so that's the story of that trilogy.
And this book, the new book,
Let me just interrupt a second.
Did you originally envision, you said a series, was it three in your mind?
It was three because of the three divisions.
So it always was three?
It was always three, no more.
Did you see them as a trilogy in a specific sense or a series of three?
Well, I saw them as a trilogy because
Although they stand alone, they're vastly different stories.
Are they all related in fact?
Well, they're related in the same family.
And a couple of things, genetic things, genetic things.
I took a chance on something in the first book, which is I showed a man who simply by holding someone's hands could sense
impending death.
Now that's kind of weird and science fiction-y.
And I said to myself, God, I covered medicine all those years.
Now all the doctors in the world are going to jump on me and say, what's it?
They call me up and they say,
You don't know me.
I practice such and such in Tennessee.
Is there anything I can do to help y'all out?
They drop in.
They drop in at the house.
They come for lunch.
Because you got it.
Because you nailed it.
Because the three, the two books, you know, although I've talked to European doctors about the other, this and this one.
But they really love them.
They really do.
You'll see on the credits of this,
a couple of professors across the medical school, general practitioner in the hills, Greenfield doctors.
Can they respond to this thing about the field?
Oh, yeah.
Well, they say, I have gotten letters.
This is the weird thing, not from doctors, but I've gotten letters from people who say, my cousin has this ability, you know, and discuss it very seriously.
And then I talk to doctors, and they say that...
they know a lot of doctors who without clinical science you know without any scientific know when a patient's not going to make it because you know it's just something they learn how to yeah i do too so that's that's as stretchy as i got and uh i'll tell you i am the world's luckiest man as far as my career is concerned i i know that
But I've also worked my ass off.
I have worked so hard.
I really have.
And I've had other writers say to me, what's the matter with you?
You know, you can knock out a book a year, right?
And it takes me about four years because I researched the daylights out.
We've got to get into that.
And I'm going to use the pursuer.
Go ahead.
You were saying out on the street that you started it for 40.
writing books, but you always had these twin goals of being... Oh, yeah.
When I was a kid... Sorry.
When I was a kid, when I was a little child in Worcester... Are you a Worcester native?
I'm a Worcester native.
I was born in Worcester.
I didn't know that.
And I lived on Houghton Street on Grafton Hill, and we had a...
a neighborhood party.
I must have been six years old or something like that.
And we had a maypole.
In this working class neighborhood, you know, we had a field behind the house and somebody had the imagination of creating a maypole and all the little kids danced around a maypole.
And I was the king.
I ended up as the king, a little kid, and there was a little girl who was the queen.
And they called the telegram, somebody with publicity mind, and they called the telegram, and a reporter and a photographer came out.
I remember this so clearly.
I thought that was the most wonderful thing, that all that these guys did was go to, you know, great places and talk to people.
And I immediately thought that that was... Okay, don't mind me, by the way.
Yeah, okay, good.
And that's better because I can't pose for a picture.
So, I thought that that was wonderful, and I began thinking about journalism, and as I grew up, you know, reading newspapers and about newspapers, excuse me, but we didn't have any money, like most of the people in my half of Worcester, and it was
I was a Depression kid, the end of the Depression, I remember it.
And so we never went away on vacation or anything like that.
And I discovered early that by reading books, you know, I could go anywhere.
And so I started going to Billings Square Library.
Sometimes I'd go twice a day.
You know, I'd get four books.
I'd run home and I'd race through the books and I'd come back and I would read them and come in again for four more books.
And the librarians used to say to me, Noah, go swimming this afternoon.
Truly, truly.
And, but, so I had, right from the time I was a little kid, I had two
I thought I would like to be a newspaper reporter and I would like to write books.
And I'm one of the few people, I think, who has been really able to do what he dreamed of as a kid, didn't become an anthropologist or a plumber instead, you know.
So tell me about, so you went to Worcester schools?
I went to Eastside Worcester schools.
I went to Union Hill School for grammar school.
I went to Grafton Street Junior High School.
Geez.
Yeah.
And then I went to Classical High, where we got a kind of great education few kids are able to get from American public schools today, which is terrible.
Tragedy.
So is Moraine a Worcester woman?
Moraine went to Classical High School, too.
I didn't know her until I had been discharged from the Army.
And was about to start college, and we double dated, you know, and I met her.
And you were in service for her?
I was in service from, oh God, I used to remember those dates, February 6th or something, 1945.
Right after the war.
To 20 months later, yeah.
Yeah, the end of the war.
Actually, I went in when...
As I say in that speech, Harry Truman's been, you know, castigated for dropping the bomb.
No, by me.
My father was ready to ship out of the tanker.
So was I. I mean, we had been... I had been through Repl-Depot No.
2, Replacement Depot No.
2 for the Pacific War, which was still going on, and they pulled us off.
They brought us to...
Presidio of Monterey to form the 7th Corps, and one of my friends who was a corporal, his name was just the same as a famous correspondent, Connie.
Anyway, his father was a newspaper man, divorced from his mother.
His father was overseas covering the war, but his mother worked for the Department of War, now Department of Defense, and she used to send
cards to his next posting to let him know where he was going.
And we were going to join Signal Corps, what they called JASCOs, which were joint assault signal companies.
I was in the infantry.
So we would give cover to the first wave that set up the communication systems for the invasion of Japan.
Probably would have been killed.
I thought it was going to be a sailor.
It was going to be an oiler.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So, you know, Lorraine and I have marched, actually, up in Asheville to come
to commemorate the people who were killed there, you know, to pay respect.
You ask people like Bill Manchester or Paul Faso, you know, how they feel about it.
Yeah.
You know, they absolutely feel lives were saved.
Oh, yeah.
A lot of lives were saved by those bombs, which was a terrible thing, but... Terrible thing?
War is a terrible thing.
Yeah, war is a terrible thing.
We know that.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I really think that we're taking a rotten rap on that.
Well, anyway, it was funny to me because we were marching in...
in Asheville, not to demonstrate or anything, it was just to show respect to the people who had been killed there.
And this guy was yelling, calling us pinkos and everything, and here I was happy that they dropped the bomb, and he just couldn't see the connection.
But anyway, so... So it's, and I don't need all the minute stuff, but... So then you went to Boston University, you said the J School?
I went to J School.
And did you go work for the T&G?
No.
I went to J School, and I...two things.
We weren't ready to be married.
She had another year of school.
And she went to Clark.
She went to Clark.
And the immediate past president of the Friends of the Goddard Library in Clark.
Oh, great.
That's a great library.
Good library, really.
But...and I felt...I wanted a...I wanted a...
more liberal education, although at the J School we had 75% of our courses were liberal arts, and I enjoyed it there.
But I was working under two people, a guy named Gerald Warner Brace, who was a good novelist, and he was at the School of Liberal Arts in the Graduate School, and Dorothy Spear, who was a very commercial novelist, former MGM contract writer, and she wrote a bestseller called The Road to Needles, I think, years and years ago.
And her father was
Treasurer, E. Ray Speer, Treasurer of the University.
She came there to die.
She came from California.
She had a cancer.
She knew she was dying.
She died a year after I left the school.
But for a couple of years she taught.
She was a really good teacher of writing.
And I felt, you know, it was a chance to stay on.
And I got half a year left on the GI Bill and I borrowed 300 bucks from an uncle.
You can't do that today and stay in school.
But I did then, and that was the first thing we repaid after I got married.
Yeah, but $300 then is like three grand today.
Yeah, that was a lot of money then.
That it is.
Yeah, and he was nice enough.
My tuition at Bates, 34 years, and always $2,000.
He said, well, that's nothing.
I said, no, it was a lot.
Absolutely.
My father really had his...
Oh, yeah.
I'm sure my uncle never expected to see the money back, but Lorraine v. Lorraine, you know, we were happy.
As soon as we were married, that was the first thing we paid off.
But there wasn't a job at the Telegram.
I tried to get a job teaching English.
I had a new master's in English and creative writing, you know.
And you got back from where?
From BU, from the graduate school.
And there was a recession at the time.
There were no jobs in the whole area.
We're in the 50s now.
We're in 1951.
And so I went to New York.
I had another uncle with an apartment on Washington Heights or something.
And I stayed there.
I went to CCNY and ran off a bunch of resumes.
And I just went from publishing house to publishing house.
Here's a resume.
I'm looking for work.
And it took me three of the most agonizing
rejection-laden weeks of my life.
And I got a job at Avon as a junior editor.
And we published a lot of junk.
I was in the periodic department.
Were the paperbacks in there?
No, that was a big paperback house.
But I was in the periodical department.
We published a science fiction reader, a fantasy reader, gardening manuals, and about 19 comic books.
It was a job.
It was a great starting job.
I'll tell you why.
I was earning nothing, you know, I mean really nothing.
And I was there for a while.
We were living, literally living in a garret.
My uncle, another uncle in Brooklyn had gotten us an attic apartment around the corner from where he lived in Borough Park.
And
And no furniture, you know, I mean, it was very romantic.
We thought we were like poets in Paris, you know.
But it began parling after a while.
And I knew I needed more money.
And I went to my boss and I said, you know, I just can't make it.
I think my take home was $43 or something.
And he didn't want to lose me.
So what he did was, do you remember comic books?
Oh, yeah.
They had...
They had the pages of solid matter in the middle of it, a little short story, kind of.
And we used to buy them from freelancers.
Instead, he assigned them to me.
So I'd go home for the weekend, and I don't know, he paid me.
Yeah, he paid me like, I don't know, I don't remember whether it was $25 or $75.
And I used to knock a few of them off.
When did we get paid for that?
For what?
For the little comic book things I did for Southern.
$11 a page.
Eleven's on the page?
Is that okay?
No, eleven dollars a year.
Oh, it's red.
Is that all I got?
No, that was wonderful.
You had a seven dollar a week long.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, anyway, I used to knock them off, you know, maybe a number of them on the weekend.
When I went to Bates, I worked for the Lewiston Sun at night.
for a buck and a half an hour.
You've got to remember, this was in 1951.
For 12 bucks, I take home 10 bucks.
It was great money.
It was a wonderful experience for you.
You could say it worked on a newspaper.
Anyway, it was great because all they are is sheer plot, those little things.
I was learning about storylines and what worked.
You were writing for readership.
I was writing for readership and I was also writing
And they had a romance book.
I was writing an advice to the Love Lawn column, and I would put in the names of all of my friends.
I would fake this book, fake the letters, and sign my friends' names.
Oh, come on.
I did, really.
We had the most fun with it, you know, close friends, and nothing liable.
The Wonderfly Magazine was there.
Nothing liable.
I don't remember the name.
It was a romance comic book.
It was a comic book.
Comic book, yeah.
And anyway, I did that for a period of time, and
So you're just married now, because I think you said 51.
You were married.
Yeah.
Did Lorraine live in New York with you?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, she lived in New York.
We lived in a little attic hovel, and I think I got laid off from there.
Not because of my work, which was, my boss really liked me, but I was assistant to the editor of the department, and they
They took away his assistant because of, you know, cutbacks.
It was a bad recession.
I had worked there about two years.
And I'm trying to remember how I got the other job.
I think maybe, I don't remember if I answered an ad in the paper or what, but I remember
running into a classmate looking for work.
Classmate of mine is Jason in New York.
And he's saying to me, Ed Lin, and Ed said to me, no, it's not only as if they're advertising for a bus driver when they're asking for a writer or an editor.
They want a bus driver who intimately knows the corner of Main Street and Elm.
You know what I mean?
So it was discouraging for young guys starting out.
But I got a job on a little news and picture magazine.
Look published a thing called Quick.
I remember Quick.
Well, we were the first imitator of Quick.
It was called Focus.
And I worked there for a couple of years.
I started... A couple of years.
A couple of years.
You did your apprenticeship, didn't you?
Yes, and that was good because I did all kinds of stories, all kinds of stories.
I road tested a jet plane, you know, an army plane.
I did all kinds of stories, interviewed all kinds of people, and I ended up as managing editor of that book.
This is Focus.
Focus, but we never really liked New York.
Do you remember a little published focus?
Yes, magazine management.
And we never really liked New York.
We hated New York.
We were, you know, products of smaller places.
And I used to come home to Brooklyn, and we had our first child, and I'd see my wife.
You went to where?
To Brooklyn.
So you lived in Brooklyn?
I lived in Brooklyn.
I used to work on Madison Avenue, you know, long commute by train.
Really no money, and I would come home.
and find my wife and kids seated by the garbage cans waiting for daddy, you know?
So the kid, you already started having a family right away.
Lisa, not right away, but Lorraine had a miss with our first one.
Maybe, I don't know.
Before I forget, why don't you give me the kids and the names?
Lisa was my oldest child.
Lisa Ann.
L-I-S-E.
No, Lisa.
No, she doesn't use the Ann anymore.
L-I-S-E, Gordon.
Lisa Gordon.
She lives where?
She lives in Watertown.
Okay.
She has given us our first grandchild, but I'm going to ask you not to mention them.
If you don't mind.
I mean, I'm weird about that.
I don't want anyone messing with that kid because of publicity.
That's fine.
You know?
They're crazy people.
I wouldn't even say where they live.
Yeah.
Okay, well, Lisa lives in the... They're all in the Boston area.
And Jamie is our middle child.
Yeah.
I mean, I'll just mention... And Michael is our youngest.
And he lives in Brookline, too.
Brookline.
That sounded like Brooklyn.
No, he lives in Brookline, but I used to come home to Brooklyn.
I'm not even going to say you live in Brookline.
I'm going to say you have an apartment in suburban Boston.
That's wonderful.
And a house in western Massachusetts.
Oh, yeah.
I never do that stuff.
Wonderful.
Okay, because it scares me.
Don't worry about it.
Okay.
Thanks, Nick.
And anyway, so I came here and I freelanced for a year doing men's magazine stuff and things like that.
Here being Boston?
In Worcester.
First I lived with my mother-in-law and then we got an apartment on June Street.
This is a Worcester story.
This is a Worcester story, yeah.
And it was, you know,
I'd come home and there'd be three checks in the thing, and we would say, wow, we're rich, and then five months would go by and you wouldn't get a check, you know.
So, finally I went up, and I'm trying to remember the name of the guy who interviewed me first for the Telegram.
He retired almost immediately.
You wouldn't know him.
He was long ago.
But anyway, then I saw Frank Murphy.
And they hired me.
They put me out into Fitchburg.
And I had a good time.
Well, what year was this?
Well, let's say I got my master's in 51.
I think I was in New York about four years and then a year of freelancing.
Must have been about 56, maybe.
56 to 60 years of telegram.
I don't know.
I'll have to get the dates and dig them out.
I've got them all written down, but I'll give them to you.
I'll call you with them.
I'm sorry to be a stickler.
No, no, no.
That's good.
But I worked in the county for... They had a crazy rule then.
To work in the city, you have to have a master's degree, which I had for me.
What, that was a rule they had?
That was a rule.
To come into, now what, Jack Tubert never graduated, never went to school, you know.
But for new reporters, at the time, they made you take a battery of psychological tests.
The guy came out and was hiring me.
It wasn't Frank Murphy, and he said, God, this shows that you're a cross between, you know, a poet and a businessman.
I looked at him.
And they put me out in Fitchburg, where I worked under Dave Gilmogno.
Worked me hard, and that was good.
And I covered, you know.
Oh, I knew Dave.
Yeah.
He stayed till the bitter end.
Yeah, he stayed a long time.
And his kid became mayor of Fitchburg.
I wondered if that was his kid.
I saw Gilmogno.
He was a firefighter, and then he became... Yeah, yeah.
Wow.
And his brother, I think, is...
Is that Ed Martin?
Yes, I don't know.
Gil Martin got a great sweetheart job at the UMass Medical School.
Gil Martin?
Dave did.
Dave did?
Dave, yeah, when he left the paper, I mean, because all of his connections, he was like the head of PR for the UMass.
And he didn't know a thing about medicine.
He was straight.
He paid more money than he's made in his life, probably.
Isn't that great?
I'm glad.
I don't even know if he's alive or dead now, to tell you.
But anyway, he worked us all hard, didn't do a thing out there himself.
I want to start moving this along, because I've been in Herald, right?
Okay, yeah.
So you were to telegram for about four years, or whatever, and then you went from there to the Herald?
The Herald, yeah, hired me away.
Actually, the telegram would have been very chagrined, but their business writer, what was his name, very well-known business writer, he recommended me to a friend on the Herald, and I didn't even know him, but I got a call from the Herald, and I came in, and they hired me, and I worked.
First, I got a good job.
They somehow knew I could write, and I got the color.
on the top story of the day.
I was always on page one with the sidebar.
Somebody else would do the, you know, the hard news.
The hard news, you did the soft news stories.
And I did the soft news stories, which was fun.
Which is what the Herald of the Graduate is.
Yeah, yeah.
So, well, this wasn't this Herald.
This was the Herald.
This was the old, full folio Herald.
Herald Traveller, yeah.
Yeah.
Before it was the Herald Traveller.
Even before the Traveller?
Yeah.
The Traveller was the morning paper, like the telegram and the gazette, you know.
So, uh,
I worked there.
I wanted to cover science.
I really did.
I wanted to cover science when I was at the Telegram.
It's all in this speech.
I went to Hudson-Hogland with the Pallista Foundation.
He gave me a list of books to read.
I read them.
Just to know while you're at the... While I'm at the Herald, while I'm at the Telegram, too, really.
And I began digging up science stories for myself.
So how did the first book become to be written?
I...
I went to cover a medical meeting at Dartmouth.
I ran into Evan Hill, an old friend who used to teach at BU when I was there, you know.
And he was working for the Saturday Evening Post, and he said, what are you writing?
And I said, a Sunday column, and he said, you're a lazy bastard.
And I went back, and he got me mad, and I sat down and I batted out an idea and sent it to the Saturday Evening Post to Ben Hidd, the editor, yeah, but didn't say that
I didn't presume on our friendship because I didn't want to embarrass them.
But they bought it.
And then he came out a little while later and we had lunch and he said, you know, the piece he sold to the Post, for two years I had been building a file on that piece.
I was going to do it myself for the Post.
And what was the piece?
It was a piece on a priest in Boston who did two things.
He worked with suicides, talking them off of ledges, and he worked with street gangs.
And they used it as a cover story on the place.
50s now, right?
Because they were in the 60s now.
This is in the 60s, I guess.
Yeah, early 60s.
And the post ran it as a cover story.
And then went out of business.
Do you remember the headline?
Then went out of business.
I think it was called Suicide Priesthood.
Maybe not.
Street Gang.
I don't remember.
I really don't remember.
But...
I remember that they sent a couple of high-powered photographers, two brothers, didn't consult me, didn't call me, thank God, and they got the priest and they made a date with the street gang.
The street gang didn't show up.
They just grabbed kids off the street, posed them, and then they ran it saying, Father Murphy talks to street gangs in Boston, and they were sued.
And immediately they exempted me.
I mean, I sweated, because I had nothing to do with that, you know.
But I don't know how that came out.
They probably settled out of court.
But it always blew my mind that these high-powered magazine photographers didn't know any better than that.
They knew better.
That's just the way they were.
They just took a chance.
They took a chance, yeah.
So this certainly emboldened you now to... Well, Pat, what happened was, through Evan Hill,
I approached his agent, you know, and I got his agent.
That's one of the questions I have.
Yeah.
Okay.
And I got his agent.
Who was?
Well, his agent then was a woman named Connie Smith, who immediately, before I even came on board, resigned because her husband was dying of cancer and she nursed him to death, you know.
But her partner was a woman named Pat Sharple.
And she was my agent for a long time.
And she went to lunch with the Post, and on the basis of the lunch, raised my rate and everything, and I never sold them another piece because they went out of business.
So you got the agent to do magazine work?
I got the agent to do magazine work, but she said, what do you have?
And I had written a couple of... These are PW kinds of questions, by the way.
These are the kinds of stuff.
They like to know how it happens.
Right.
And because we're pressed for a time, we've got an hour, we really have to get into the European stuff.
Okay, I'll race through this.
I'm not pushing you, but I'm mindful of your schedule.
Okay, anyway, I got Pat, and she got me a contract.
A book contract?
A book contract.
With whom?
With McGraw-Hill.
And this was for the rabbi?
This was for the rabbi, yeah.
On the strength of a proposal?
On the strength of a proposal.
How old were you at this time?
At that time I was in my late 30s.
At the Herald I had reached the point where I had my own office, I was away from the city desk, I could make my own assignments, my own hours, everyone let me alone.
I could go where I wanted and cover what I wanted.
I had a dream newspaper job as far as I was concerned and I loved Boston working here.
But I really wanted to do this, and Lorraine said, do it.
But at that time, I had three kids.
By that time, I had three kids.
I had a mortgage in Framingham, you know.
But we had an advance.
I don't remember what it was.
I think it was $7,500 in the beginning.
I'm not sure.
Yeah, I think it was.
I may be wrong.
I could even be wrong, but... I told you what I sold my book for.
It's just two years ago.
Yeah, you didn't, but... $15,000.
Yeah.
Because I was willing to take anything.
Well, that's twice as much as I'm talking about.
This was 1994.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
But, so you don't owe them all that advanced.
You're making it now.
You'll get it.
It's coming next month, God willing.
But I don't remember what it was.
It was an advance, and it allowed us to live until the book.
And toward the end, I was really desperate, and I started writing while I was still at the Herald.
So you left the Herald?
Yeah.
First, I took an American newspaper leave of absence for six months.
Then I renewed it for six months, which is all they would allow.
I would have renewed it forever, but they wanted somebody to cover science and medicine.
And I knew that that was only fair, so I resigned.
And I began freelancing when I finished the book.
And during the time I wrote the book.
How long did it take you to write the book?
It took me several years.
Again, see, I wish I could do more.
But let me tell you this.
I was on jury duty.
Just before I was leaving the paper, I was on jury duty in Cambridge.
And I got a call, a notice saying, call your city desk.
And I called, and they told me that Harry Solomon, Dr. Harry Cesar Solomon, the commissioner of mental health of Massachusetts, was trying to get me and call him.
And I called him, and he's the guy I had covered, you know, for a long time as a journalist.
He knew me, and he said, I know where we can get a grant
an NIMH grant to start an experimental journal in psychiatry.
Are you interested?"
And I said, Dr. Solomon, I think that doctors have more than enough to read now, but to tell you the truth, I need the money and I am interested.
Excuse me.
So I had some income from that because while I was writing the book, I got together an editorial board of mental health experts.
I began
looking for papers this was an opinion journal we would take a controversy it was quarterly to begin with i think and we would take a controversy and get two authors that hit themselves at one another it was very interesting and well read and and so i got some money that way and then i began doing cover stories for trying to remember the name of the doctor's magazine so the physician news magazine no not jamma it was
It doesn't matter.
I began freelancing medical articles.
So tell me where the rabbi came out.
Where did this... I'd always wanted to write a book about a rabbi.
Again, not because I was so religious and I'm not... I grew up in a family where... This is in that speech, too.
I won't spend too much time on it.
It's in there.
My grandmother lived with us.
In those days, you lived multi-generationally.
And she was very pious and religious old lady.
And she was, I used her for the character of the grandfather in the rabbi, who was a pious old man who drove everyone nuts.
And she certainly, you know, made us, we kept a strictly kosher home and all that stuff.
And I used to take her to the synagogue and back.
My father, it was a very ethnic man and loved being a Jew, but was a completely free thinker of our religion.
He used to take me to Klan banks and
At the lake, you know, which eats forbidden food and all that stuff.
So, I grew up with these two influences.
The lake being Lake Quincey.
Lake Quincey.
So, I grew up with these two influences, you know, which made for an interesting kind of thing.
But, so, anyway, that, the book came out and was a bestseller and I was tremendously
Tremendously lucky.
You know, I was able... Were you surprised?
Oh, yeah.
I just wanted to survive.
As every writer, every young writer, you know, nobody... Were you surprised?
I mean, you know, you don't know.
You just don't know it's going to be like that.
And isn't it the most wonderful feeling in the world?
A kid, only a kid can beat it.
Having a kid... That's exactly... I agree with you.
I really agree with you.
Because I just couldn't believe it.
Look, all the time I'd worked at the Worcester Telegram and at the Boston Herald, thank God they never knew this, I would have paid them to let me come to work.
I mean, I really would have.
I was so happy.
That's why I review books for Ivan.
Yeah.
They're free.
And when I was book editor, I mean, it was the most exploitive thing.
These people would willingly do it for free.
Yeah, because people want, people who want to write, want to write.
They want to write, and then to be published, to see the thing in print.
Yeah, yeah.
so it was it was heaven you know it was really heaven and i've never worked for anybody since and what happened was we uh the seed money ran out at for the journal yeah and uh we asked hudson hoagland i got i got a grant from huffman la roche an industry grant you know and we asked hudson hoagland to administer it for us at the list of foundation which he did and we were right oh
So I did this to my second book, which I was writing while trying to put out these journals and all that stuff, and I was having trouble.
I didn't want to be a publisher.
I wanted to be a novelist, but I had this thing going.
So I asked Lorraine if she would help me.
She came in and became associate publisher because she didn't want to be called publisher.
I kept the title publisher.
But we published that and another journal that we were asked to publish.
The Journal of Human Stress, which is now called Behavioral Medicine, and is published by a non-profit foundation in Washington, D.C.
But we published those two journals for 16 years.
And it was nice, because it would allow me to go to medical meetings, you know, someplace and see guys I used to cover with and all that stuff.
I think you told me earlier, when we were having breakfast, about the genesis of the idea of the medical novels.
Yeah.
and this clearly is the background.
Briefly, though, the research that you do.
You don't mind jumping around a little bit?
No, there's something I should tell you in connection with that.
It isn't only that I have worked as a medical journalist on newspapers and a medical publisher, but, for example, when I was researching the death committee, I attended mortality conferences at two Boston teaching hospitals, you know?
And there was one point where I wanted to get a little more of the flavor of the operating room, and so I went to a man I knew who was then director of Boston City Hospital.
I can't even give you his name now.
He's a layman.
I don't remember his name.
But I said to him, can I kind of hang around the OR and observe a little?
He said, no, we can't allow that, but if you will take a little training course we have in
in surgical technician, I'll allow you to volunteer as an unpaid.
So I did, but you know what happened?
They weren't crazy.
The only thing they allowed me to do was clean up after dirty, you know, mopping pail stuff.
But between operations, there I was in this now dirty thing, and we were all sitting around while they had a cigarette,
And I wasn't writing, and so they would just talk to me like another person there.
So I got some good stuff for about a couple of months.
And then at one point... That's the way to get the stuff.
At one point, I volunteered at Westboro State Hospital to work on closed wards, also unpaid.
And then when we moved to the hills, we didn't have an ambulance.
So I took training that lasted.
about almost a year, nine months or something, part-time, you know, evenings and weekends, and certified as an emergency medical technician.
I did that for eight and a half years.
This is out in Western Massachusetts.
Out in Western Massachusetts.
You wear a pager in your belt.
The pager goes off.
You run for your pickup truck.
You drive to the firehouse.
Now, what prompted you to move out there, just in fact?
We lived in Framingham.
I had filled three-quarters of an acre.
Every last inch was
some kind of plant, you know.
My kids were out of the house, and I said to Lorraine almost idly one day, would you ever think of living in the country?
And she said, maybe.
And my kids had gone to UMass, and we had been... Amherst.
Amherst, and we had driven into the hills and found them really beautiful.
And I began to look for a piece of land, and I found it.
And about when was that being out there?
About
Well, it would be 18 years now, and it took us like two years to build a house.
Is that about 20 years ago when we first decided to go to this?
Framingham in 59.
Where have you been?
Framingham in when?
September 59.
Oh, see, I don't remember at all.
March of 79.
Do you remember the years in New York?
Yes, from 51.
August, this 51th, February of 56th.
Okay, and do you remember... How long was I at the telegram?
I think it was five years.
I don't know.
I said five years to Tubert, and Tubert said he thought it was West.
I don't remember.
I read it at Tubert.
Oh, you're quoting Tubert now?
No.
No, no, no.
No, Jack thought it was West.
Did he look it up?
I wonder.
I'm sure I've got it written down.
It's a big deal.
It's a few years.
Yeah, this is maybe...
Four or five years.
In 59, you were already... No, it wasn't five years, because in 59... Jack didn't think it was five years.
Let me talk.
I'm sorry.
The reason we moved to Framingham is because you were commuting from Worcester to Boston.
That's a pretty good drive.
Yeah, when I got for Hyde by the Harriet.
Well, it couldn't have been, because we moved... It was just a couple of years, because we moved to Worcester in 1956.
And we left Worcester in 59.
So, three years.
So, two years.
I may have the wrong length of time on that speech.
That's right.
Don't worry about it.
Yeah.
I'm going to... I'm going to... Okay.
Just so I know about this.
Okay.
Maureen, what's really important, do you remember when he signed his contract for the first novel?
With the rabbi?
With the rabbi.
She'll look it up.
She's got everything.
I don't know if I have that here, but I'll... Well, yeah, because I'm just... I'm really trying to get into the right... Yeah, because this is a publishing thing.
Well, it was published in...
65.
Okay.
Yeah.
So it took about three, four years to write, you figure?
Maybe that one took, yeah, maybe two or three years.
That's right.
Publish 65 is fine.
That's cool.
Yeah, I think I worked in the paper until 65.